---
title: My Dissertation Abstract
author: LMS
layout: page
---
**Acts of Home-making: Home and Urban Space in Twentieth Century African American and Puerto Rican Cultural Productions**

This study compares representations of New York City in the cultural productions of African Americans and Puerto Ricans throughout the twentieth century and looks at how they display a yearning to claim the city as a home. Ultimately, I argue that both African Americans and Puerto Ricans try to make New York City into a home space through what I have named &#8220;acts of homemaking.&#8221; That is, the cultural productions here examined depict their representations of this city as a place where they can express their humanity and a sense of community&#8211;but this struggle is a continuous one. Through the concept of home, the power dynamics that operate in both domestic space and urban space help illustrate better how citizenship operates. In other words, talking about home is also talking about citizenship and about nation. In Chapter 1 I argue that poet Willie Perdomo&#8217;s invocation in *When A Nickel Costs a Dime* of Langston Hughes&#8217; Harlem as portrayed in *Montage of a Dream Deferred* opens up the notion of a Black Metropolis to include Puerto Ricans. Chapter 2 brings together Piri Thomas&#8217;s memoir *Down These Mean Streets* and Ann Petry&#8217;s *The Street* in order to support my claim that the sense of urban community that Thomas finds is lacking in Petry&#8217;s narrative precisely because it is a community only available to men. In Chapter 3 I focus on *West Side Story* and *Raisin in the Sun*, two productions that both premiered on film in 1961, in order to show how both texts demonstrate how the violent imposition of narratives of home and citizenship prevent both groups from making a home in the city. Chapter 4 looks at representations of New York City in the works of photographers Frank Espada and photographer Roy DeCarava. DeCarava shows a relationship between subject and place that Espada struggles with: New York City as a home. Looking at the representations of New York City across genres can show how the yearning to make New York City a home is not a coincidence but an indication of wider trends that intersect the experiences of minorities in U.S. cities.