---
title: Reflections Upon Grading As I Begin My Hiatus, Part II
author: silvaphd
layout: post
permalink: /reflections-upon-grading-as-i-begin-my-hiatus-part-ii/
categories:
  - teaching
tags:
  - "don't look back in anger"
  - grading
  - higher ed
---
<span class='embed-youtube' style='text-align:center; display: block;'></span> 

*Musical interlude, seemingly unrelated to grading*

On Monday I [posted][1] the first part of my reflections upon grading. I titled it &#8220;Don&#8217;t Look Back in Anger&#8221; because amidst my frustration and stress that last day, I started humming to myself, out of nowhere, Oasis&#8217;s song. It seemed fitting that grading would make me think &#8220;Don&#8217;t look back in anger,&#8221; because grading is the one thing I dislike about teaching&#8230;this doesn&#8217;t mean I don&#8217;t like teaching. On the contrary, I enjoy teaching very much. It&#8217;s the reason why I try so hard to figure out how to effectively assess that my students are ready to move on from my class.

As far as I can remember I&#8217;ve struggled with grading. When I started, I struggled with how to add and subtract grades. You&#8217;d think college instructors would know that. I&#8217;m sure there are departments where instructors learn that sort of thing. My department wasn&#8217;t one of them. It honestly didn&#8217;t make sense to me: &#8220;So I add the letters? And the letters have different values? Ok, ok, that I get. Wait, what? An A minus is how much? Oh, screw that.&#8221; (It didn&#8217;t help that the school where I did my undergrad only had whole letter grades, so the slight variations between pluses and minuses didn&#8217;t really come into focus until way later. I&#8217;d argue they&#8217;re still a little fuzzy.) I honestly don&#8217;t remember who helped me figure out how to tally grades, but eventually I handed something in to the professor for whom I was a TA.

My troubles were so simple then. After that I taught my very own writing course for the first time. It was scary. I had no idea where to start! And assignments? How do I figure out what assignments to teach? And how to grade them? Needless to say that first semester was, well, tough. Grading didn&#8217;t get any easier. So my second semester teaching writing I switched from letter grades to number grades. My rationale for this was the numbers would keep the students from obsessing over the letter A and focus on what what going on in the paper. The rubric I put together showed the students areas where they excelled (+ points) and areas where they missed the mark (- points). It would also make adding and subtracting at the end of the course a heck of a lot easier. (C&#8217;mon, we all invest so much time and energy into our jobs, why can&#8217;t we make this one part of our job easier?) But a colleague rightfully pointed out, at the end you still have to give them a letter grade. All the numbers still translate into a letter. Huh.

Enter a whole new system. At my old school we had a brand spankin&#8217;-new writing program right after I finished teaching my second writing course; I learned about the portfolio system, which they incorporated into the curriculum. I really like the concept of the portfolio system, and from what I&#8217;ve heard on Twitter, a lot of other writing instructors do too.  If you&#8217;re not familiar with it, here&#8217;s how it goes at my old school: the students would submit their work throughout the semester, I&#8217;d fill out a rubric and tell them what category their paper fell under (plus some feedback), and they&#8217;d revise three out of four papers for their end-of-semester portfolio. At the end I&#8217;d evaluate what grade the student had earned for their overall work (as seen in the portfolio). So far I like this system better than other systems&#8211; for one, it helps when you have just three letter grades to tally instead of several smaller grades for smaller projects. But the major reason I like it is because it fosters revision, introspection&#8230;when done right. At its worse you end up reading the same exact draft you read weeks ago, no changes. This is the source of frustration for some instructors.

However, in the end, I still had to read and pretend-grade dozens of essays every few weeks. It still took up my time and my energy. The system is a good system in theory, but still plenty of work. I tried this grading system when I started adjuncting at a community college, but the students slacked off. Some didn&#8217;t hand in the drafts, some refused to even edit their final drafts, others didn&#8217;t even try to hand in a complete portfolio. I blamed the portfolio process; perhaps they didn&#8217;t feel accountable to me or to themselves. So this semester I tried grading their papers throughout the semester and made the revised portfolio optional. However, what seems like a good deal for the students (at least those who actually tried to improve their papers) resulted in a painful, stressful few weeks for me. That last week of the semester I had to reread dozens of essays that I had already gone through the trouble of grading the first time, and many of them had not even an inkling of revision. I found myself rereading their revisions AND their originals to ensure fairness. Honestly, I don&#8217;t get paid enough money to do all this work. I don&#8217;t.

Sure, my painful grading could be the students&#8217; fault, but I don&#8217;t blame the tedious process on them. I refuse to put the blame on the quality of their work; I am there to help them, am I not? And if they don&#8217;t hand in A work, I always wonder what I can do next time to ensure that they improve. (This might be part of the reason why grading feels like such an intense process, but that&#8217;s a whole other ballgame.) I blame our obsession with these letters: theirs, mine, and the administrations. We still want to know what letter grade we received because A equals excellence, B equals good work, C equals satisfactory work (or &#8220;damn, I&#8217;m no good at writing&#8221; which is what students usually think when they see a C), and anything below means &#8220;Forget about it.&#8221;

Even though I&#8217;m not teaching anymore, I still think about these issues. (You never know, I might make my way back into the classroom some day.) For writing, wouldn&#8217;t it be more beneficial if we could just work with them closely throughout the semester on revising their papers instead of fussing over grades?

I will miss teaching. But I won&#8217;t miss grading. Nope, not at all.

 [1]: http://wordsaremygame.wordpress.com/2011/05/23/dont-look-back-in-anger-or-reflections-upon-grading-as-i-begin-my-hiatus/